



l e m e . l i b r a r y . u t o r o n t o . c a

s t c 2 3 0 1 0 . 5

v e r . 1 . 0  ( 2 0 1 9 )





¶ The boke of Englysshe,
and Spanysshe.


THe Fyrste
Chapyter is
of god, of the Tri|
nytie, of power, & 
of ryches.
EL primero Capi. 
es de Dios / y de 
la Trinidad / y de la
potencia / y de la re|
queza.

God
 Dios

Godheade
holy
 deidad santa

the Trinite
 Trinidad

Father sonne
 Padre Fiso

holy Ghoste.
 santo espirito.

Lorde
God
 Señor Dios

sauyour redemer
 saluador redemptor

power myghty
 potestad potente

myght very ryche
 potencia muy rico

ryche poore
 requeza pobre

pouerte
 pobreza

a poore
man 
pobrezillo

Idoles
 Idolos

almyghtye.
 omnipotente.


¶ The .ii. cha|
piter of the Pater
noster and Aue
Maria.
¶ El .ii. capi. del Pa|
ternoster y dell Aue
Maria.



OVre Father 
whiche arte
in heauen, Halo|
wed be thy name, 
let come thy kyng­
dome, thy wyll be 
done, euen to in 
earthe as it is in 
heuen, oure dayly
breade, gyue vs
this day, and for|
gyue vs our det|
tes, as we forgy|
ue oure detters, & 
lede vs not in to 
temptacion.
 
PAdre nuestro qui 
eres / en los cielos 
sanctificado sea eftu 
nombre venga el tuo 
reyno / faga se tu vo|
luntad assy en el cie|
lo como en la tierra / 
nuestro pan / cotidia|
no dadle a nosotros / 
oy y perdonna a no|
sotros nuestra deuda 
como nosotros perdo 
namos a nuestros de|
udores y no nostria|
gas ententacion.

The second half of the chapter heading, in Spanish ("El .ii. capi. del Paternoster y dell  Aue Maria"), has been, for clarity, moved from here so that it follows the English version of the chapter heading above.)



But delyuer vs
from all euyll.
Amen.
 Mas lifra nos de 
mal. Amen.


¶ All hayle Ma|
rye full of Grace, 
the lorde is with 
the. Blessed be thou 
amonge women,
and blessed be the 
fruite of thy wom­



be Iesu Christ.
 ¶ Aue
Maria plena 
de gracia el Sennor 
contigo benedita tu /
entre las mugeres y 
'benedito el fruyto de 
'tu vientre Iesu 
Christo.

Saint Mary mo­
ther of God, pray 
for vs poore Syn­
ners, now and in 
the houre of oure
death. Amen.
 Sancta Maria ma|
dre de Dios tuego per
nosotros miseros pec­
cadores agora y en la 
bora del nuestre mu|
erte. Amen.

¶ Wherfore
 ¶ Porque

Why not
 porque no

therfore
 por esso

for nought
 por nada

for what cause
 por que causa

let it be so aboue
 a sa bienda iuso

beneth
 es atiba

sodaynly soone
 subicamente presto

now gladly, with
 gora de buena

a good wyll
 voluntad

openlye
 publicamente

from hence
 de aqui

from this syde
 Alli

fro yonder
 de alli



behynde
 de tras

before
 de lante

ouerwharte
 altru[ ]e

withoute
 de fuera

from the syde
 de lado

after the length
 luengo

within a lytell
 dentro poco

Inoughe
 assaz

to moche
 assaz mucho

moche
 mucho

with me
 comigo

withoute
me
 fyn mi

good chepe
 buen marcado

howe
 en que manera

where
 a donde

in what place
 en que luger

yee surelye
 assi seguramente

yee more
 mattabien

by the myddest
 pro medio

thankefully
 de buena voluntad

one tyme
 Vna vez

seconde tyme
 vna autra vez

many wayes.
 diuerso modo.





¶ The .iii. Chapy­
ter is of speches.
¶ El .iii. Cap. es de 
las palavras.

¶ Euyll pleased
 ¶ Mall contento

I am euyll plesed
 yo soy mal contento

I am not worthy
 yo no soy digno

of my fasshion
 Ami manera

do after my mind
 Hazea mi voluntad

I wyll not
 No quiero

wherfore wylte
thou not
 Por que ne quieres

It pleseth me not
 No me plaze

It pleseth me wel
 Bien me plaze

I am begyled
 Soy agaunao

Of whome
 De quien

Of a knaue
 De vn
vellaco

Abyde tarye let 
me do it
 Espera dexa me hazer

It is a man of 
his mynde 
Labe[ ]udo

I meruayle sore, 
in doynge suche a 
thynge
 Me patece muy estra 
ino hazer semiantes 
cosas

It is so who 
wol­
de haue beleued it
 Assy es quien lo cryesse



I am sorye for 
his dedes
 Duelo me de sus hechos

Be pacyente
 Tene pacientia

It is not true
 No es verdad

Me thynke not
 Me paresce de no

Thou lyest
 Tumil[e]ntes

No verlye
 No a la fe

I beleue the not
 No lo creo

Why not
 Porque no

It is done for 
noughte
 Es hecho por nada aquello

I wyll not do it 
for nought
 Nolo hazer por nado

He was Idle all 
the daye thorowe
 Ha folgado to do 
el die

It is euyll done
 Es mal hecho

It is well done
 Es bien hecho

He is aboue
 Es ariba

He is not at home
 No esta en casa

Where is he
 Donde esta

I can not tell
 No se

Bowe the downe
 Baxate

Aryse go hence
 Leuanta te ve te

What wylt thou



 Que quieres

I wyll nothynge
 No quito

Syt downe
 Sienta te

Gyue me rowme
yf thou wylt
 Da me luger si tu quieres

I thanke the
 Y os lo agradesco

Syt styll
 Sienta quedo

Go soone
 Va a priessa

Cause it be made
 Fas lo rehazar

I haue done it
 Io lo hize

I haue not don it
 No lo hize

Thou hast don it
 Tu lo heziste

Thou knowest
well who dyd it
 Tu lo saves bien qui 
en lo hizo

It is
fulle
 Est alleno

It is emptye
 Est a vazio

Come with me
 Ven co migo

Helpe me
 Ayuda me

Shewe me hym
 Muestra me le

That shall I do
 yo lo quiero hazer

I haue sene hym
 yo le he visto

I knowe hym
 yo se cognosco

In the fyelde
 En la placa

I am sure that



they spake of the 
and me
 yo foy cierto qui esse 
habla de mi y de ti

The ryght hande
 La mano drecha

The lefte hande
 La manoyz queerda

Who loueth the
 Qui en te ama

Begyn thou
 Commienca

Aboue measure
 Sobre mesura

What didest thou 
with the money
 Que feziste tu con a|
quelos dineros

Yet hast thou not 
giuen me my thin­
ge agayne
 Tu hasta agora ne 
me rendiste mi cosa

I shall gyue
you 
it shortly
 yo to lo volue re­
presto

Looke you doo it 
soone, for I maye
tary no longer
 Guarda que lo ha|
gas presto / por que 
yo no puedo mas 
seperar

He wyll kyll me
 Aquell me quiere matar

He is my deadlye
enemye
 Aquell es mi enemy 
go mortall

He hateth me and 
I wote not for 
what cause
 Aquell me quere mal 
y no se por que causa



Drawe fast
 Tira fuerte

Seeke this
 Pruebaesta

Consydre it well 
before thou do it
 Piensa bien anteque 
lo hagas

He thoughte well 
vpon it, whan he 
sawe it before his 
eyes
 Accorda base muy 
bien quando vino

I wyll proue it
 yo quiero tenter

He wyll not
 Este no quere

Wylt thou come
 Quieres tu venit

I wyll come now
 yo veendre agora

Abyde a lytell
 Especa vn poco

Comest thou
 Vines tu

He sygheth sore
 Faze grandes
sospiros

He is vexed
 Es turbado

I hope
 Tengo esperanca

I am contente
 Soy contento

It is to deare
 Mucho caro

It repenteth me
 Pesame

What cal ye this
 Como sellama a|
quella

This man wylbe 
very sure
 Aquell quiere ser 
bien surego

I coulde not wel
tell it the



 No te so sabria bien dezir

Se that thou fall 
in no syckenes
 Guarda te de caer en asguna enferme dad

It becommeth me 
to weepe
 Conuienne me que
Ilore

It was nede for 
me to weepe
 Ea necessario que Ilore

Thou mockest me
 Burlas me

All hayle
 Dios vos salue

God gyue you a 
good daye
 Dios os de buenas Dias

A good yeare
 Buenos anoos

God helpe you
 Dios vos ayude

Moche good do 
it you
 Buena pro os haga

I wyll 
 yo quiero

Thou woldest
 Tu queziste

He wyll
 Aquell quiere

I wyll do it
 Quiero hazer

I haue done
 yo hize

Go, stande
 Ve / esta

Thou lettest noo
man sleepe
 Tu a niuno dex a[ ]
dormyr

Why?
 Por que?


For thou doest no 



thynge all nyght
but snorke
 Por que toda la no|
che no hazes sino 
roncar

Go sleepe
 Ve a dormir

Not yet
 Aun non

Go, for thou must 
ryse to morow be 
tymes
 Ve que es necessario 
que te luauntes
manna|
na / en buena hora

What to do
 A que hazer

Thou must beare
letters to Mylan
 Es necessidad que per|
stole las letras a 
Milan

My Legge
gre|
ueth me so that I 
cannot go on fote
 Tanto me duele la 
pierna que no pudo 
caminer a pie

Take a horse
 Toma e cauallo

Chose me one
 Busque me vno

Thou hast an ea|
sye lyfe
 Tu has bueno ti 
empo

I roode
 Fui a cauello

He went a fote
 Fue apie

I haue ben in 
that place
 yo fui na aquel luger

Se that it be 
ryghte
 Mira que sea iguall

I wyll go from hence



 yo quiero ander de aqui

I maye
remayne
no longer
 No puedo restar mas

Thou byndeste to 
great a ferdell, thou
shalte not be able 
to bere it
 Tu attas muy gran 
has no le podros 
Ileuer

I shall beare it 
well
 Portero bien

Thou shalte se
 Tu lo veras

Let me care for 
that
 Dexa el cuyda do 
a my

Gyue it me
 Da me a mi

Open the doore
 A bre la puerta

Gyue me the keye
 Da me la Ilabe

Wylte thou gyue
it me
 Quieres me lo dar

I wyll not gyue
it the
 No te lo quiero a ty­
dar

Gyue here
 Da ca

I can not open it
 No lo se obrir

Shut the dore
 Cierra la puerta

Kepe this
 Tien esso

I am hungrye
 Tengo appetito de comer

Art thou confessed
 As te confessado


From whence



commeth this
 De que viene eso

He is bannyshed
 Esta endestierro

Go & drawe wine
 Trahe dell vino

Vnderstandest
thou
 Entendes tu

Speake that I may vnderstande the
 Habla que tu entienda

It belongeth not 
to the  Eo es vuestro

It is his
 Es suyo

How much cost it
 Cue vale

What be toke|
neth that
 Que significa esto

Somthynge be|
tokeneth it
 Algo significa

Fayre worke
 Obra harmosa

It is true
 Es verdad

I bare it gladly
 yo lo a softido de bu|
ena gana

I medle not
 Ne me empaches

After a lytell
tyme, whyle
 De aquia paco tiempo

Of his owne cost
 A su costa

My name
 Nombro mio

Thy name
 Nombre tuyo

In your name, on 
your behalfe



 En nombre vuestro

The name of god
 Nombre de Dios

I knowe not how 
they call hym
 No se como sellama

Howe thynkest
thou  Que te parece

Deale thou it be|
fore vs all
 Parte tuen presentia 
de nosotros todos

The tyme is not 
yet gone
 No es passado ell tiempo

What is youre
pleasure
 Que os plaze

Euery thynge
 Toda cosa

One thynge
 Vna cosa

A good  Vnder|
standynge
 Buen entendimiento

She holdeth me
 Essa me tiene

It is shame
 He verguen ca

If thou lette me 
not go, I shal tell 
thy father
 Sy no dexa / yo lo 
dite a tu padre

Thou knowest
not what I haue
to do
 No sabes tu que he 
de hazer

Haue ye not yet 
solde your gere or 
wares
 Aun no haues venoi 
do vuetras cofas

Yes God be thanked



 Sy, gracias a Dios

What wyl ye bye
I wyll bye some 
thynge also
 Que quetroys com|
prar, que yo tam bien 
querria comprar al|
guna cosa

If ye knewe anye 
good thynge
 Se teneis alguna co 
sa buena

Yea, I knowe spi­
ces, and other 
thynges
 Assy species / y otras cosas

Come with mee,
tell me trueth
 Vent comigo dime 
la verdad

What Newes
thynke ye vpon
 Que de nueuo  recu|
ardas

And for euer
worl­
de without ende.
Amen.
 Sempeterno en Sy|
glos de syglos.
Amen.
   



¶ The .iiij. chapy­
ter of the .x. Com­
maundementes.
¶ El .iiii. Ca. de los 
diez mandamien­
tos.

Tenne preceptes
of GOD.
 Di[ce]
mandamien­
tos de Dios.

BEleue in one 
GOD
 ¶ Creo in vn Dios



Loue God
 Amaa Dios

Loue thy neygh|
boure as thy selfe
 Ama al proximo tui 
o como a ti mesmo

Halowe the Sab­
bothe
 Guarda la fiesta

Honoure Father 
and mother
 Honora padre y ma|
dre

Thou shalte not 
kyll
 No matares

Thou shalte not 
steale
 No furtaras

Thou shalte not 
breke wedlocke
 No cudeciatas

Thou shalte not 
bere false wytnes
 No dygas falso testi|
monio

Thou shalte not 
coueyte another 
mans good 
 No codicies la cofa aiena

Thou shalte not 
desyre another 
mans wyfe.
 No codicies la muger 
de otro.



¶ The .v. Chapy|
teris of the seuen
workes of mercy.
¶ El .v. Capit. de las 
seyte obras de miseri
cordia.

¶ The seuen wor­
kes of mercye.
 Seyte obras de mise­
ricordia.



TO Feede the 
hungrye
 MAntener los ambrientos

To gyue the thur­
stye drynke
 Dar de Bener a los sedientos

To cloth the naked
 Ve feiti los esnudos

To vysyte the sycke
 Visiter los enfermos

To comforte the 
prysoners
 Confortar los encar|
ceslados

To burie the deed
 Enterer los muertos

And to lodge the 
straungers
 A coger los pelegri|
nos.



¶ The .vi. Chapy­
ter is of the seuen
deedly synnes.
¶ El .vi. Capi. de los 
seyte peccados mortales.


¶ The seuen deed­
lye synnes.
 ¶ Seyte peccados 
mortales.

→ Pryde
 → Sobernia

Lecherye
 Luxuria

Coueytousnes
 Auaricia

Wrathe
 Ira

Glotonye
 Gula

Enuye
 Inuidia

Slouthfulnes.
 Accedia.





¶ The .vii. Chapi­
ter is of symple
Nombre.
¶ El. Cap. es de sym­
ple Numero.

ONE
 Vno

Two
 Dos

Three
 Trees

Foure
 Quatro

Fyue
 Cinco

Syxe
 Seys

Seuen
 Seyte

Eyght
 Ocho

Nyne
 Nueue

Tenne
 Diez

Aleuen
 Onze

Twelue
 Dose

Thyrtene
 Treze

Fouretene
 Quatorze

Fyftene
 Quinze

Syxetene
 Dieze seys

Seuentene
 Dieze e seyte

Eyghtene
 Dieze e ocho

Nynetene
 Dieze e nueue

Twentye
 Veynte

One and twentye
 Veynte vno



Two and twenty
 Veynte dos

Thre and twenty
 Veynte trees

Foure & twentye
 Veynte quatro

Fyue and twenty
 Veynte cinco

Syxe and twenty
 Veynte seys

Seuen & twenty
 Vyente seyte

Eyght & twentye
 Veynte ocho

Nine and twenty
 Veynte nueue

Thyrtye
 Treynte

Fortye
 Quarente

Fyftye
 Cinquenta

Sextye
 Sessenta

Seuentye
 Setenta

Eyghtye
 Ochenta

Nynetye
 Nouenta

A hundred
 Ciento

Two hondred
 Dozentos

Thre hondred
 Trezientos

Foure hondred
 quatrozientos

Fyue hondred
 quinientos

A thousande
 Myll

Two thousande
 Dos myll

Thre thousande
 Trees
myll

A thousande ty|
mes thousande.



 Myll myllares.




¶ The .viij. Cha|
pyter is of tyme,
yere, month, weke 
and daye.
¶ El .viii. Ca. es dell 
tiempo / anno / mes /
samana / y dia.

¶ Tyme
 ¶ Tiempo

Worldely
 Mundano

Christen
 El Christiano

The yeare
 Anno

The month
 El mes

The weke
 La semana

The daye
 El dia

An houre
 La hora

Mydnyght
 La media noche

To morowe
 La manana

The euenynge
 La tarde

The noone daye
 Medio dia

The sprynge
 Verano

Haruest
 Autumno

Whytsondaye
 Pascua de mayo

Aduente
 Aduenimiento

Christmas
 Natiuidad

Newyere tyde
 Circumcisio

The .xii. daye
 Trees teys

Sroftyde



 Catnes tollendas

Assencion
 Ascencion

Myd lent
 Media quaresma

Maundy thursday
 Iueues santo

Easter
 Pascua

An holydaye
 Fiesta

workedaye
 Dia de la brar

To laboure
 Labrar

Sondaye
 Domyngo

Mondaye
 Lunes

Teusdaye
 Martes

Wednesdaye
 Miercoles

Thursdaye
 Iueues

Frydaye
 Viernes

Saturdaye
 Sabbato

Yesterdaye
 Ayer

To make peace
 Patto fazer

O that it must be 
done, the thynge
that pleaseth me.
 A mi voluntad falta 
que se haga foque me 
plaze.



¶ The .ix. Chapy­
ter of seruauntes
¶ El .ix. Capitul. de 
los seruidores.

A foote man
 Pon



A seruaunt
 Mo[...]

A mayden
 Moca

To serue
 Seruir

A yonge man
 Mancebo

Yonge men
 Mancebos

A Chylde
 Mochacho

Chyldren
 Mochachos

A man chylde
 Varon

A woman chylde.
 Mochacha.



¶ The .x. Chapy|
ter of Graunde fa­
ther, and all the 
kynred.
¶ El x. Capit. de lo 
bisaguello / y to do el
parentesco.

¶ Graundfather
 Bysaguello

Graundmother
 Aguelo

A Father
 Padre

A Mother
 Madre

A stepfather
 Padrino

A stepmother
 Madrastra

A Sonne
 Et hiio

A doughter
 Hiia

A stepsonne
 El ahiiado

A stepdoughter
 La ahiiada



A Brother
 El hermano

A Syster
 La hermana

A bastarde sonne
 El bastardo

A Bastarde 
doughter
 La bastarda

A kynseman
 El pariente

A frynde
 El amigo

A Tutoure
 El tutor

An Vncle
 El tyo

An Aunte
 La tya

An Heyre
 El heredero

A neyghboure
 El proximo

An husbande
 El maarido

An huswyfe
 La muger

A woman
 La hembra

A wyfe
 La muger

Our maystres
 Nuestra muger

A Vyrgyn
 La donzelia

An hondmayden
 Moca

An whore.
 Putan.



¶ The xi. Chapy­
ter of Houssholde
stuffe and clothes
¶ El .xi. Capitu. es
del apareso casa y 
vestido.



¶ Houssholde
stuffe.
 ¶ Apero de  casa

A coote
 Sayo

A sherte
 Camisa

Breeches
 Braga

An hatte
 Chapeo

A hoode
 Capa

A sleue
 Magna

A Partlet
 Coller

Hosen
 Cascas

Shooes
 Capatos

Slyppers
 Galochas

Sockes
 Pantoflos

A gyrdle
 Cinta

Doublet
 Iuben

Lynynge
 Ensorto

A clocke
 Manto

Furre
 Pelleta

A Purse
 Alhaia

A Pearser to bo|
re thorowe
 Hurador furadar

A garmente
 Vestidura

A cheyne of golde
 Cananedora

A Rynge
 Anillo

A Gloue
 Guantes



Poyntes.
 Correa agueati.



¶ The .xij. Chapy­
ter of breade, and 
Wyne, and other 
thynges to be eaten.
¶ El .xii. capi. es dell 
pany / del Ayeto/ y de
todas sas cosos / de 
comer.

¶ Breade
 ¶ Pan

Wyne
 Vino

Vynegre
 Vinagre

Verioyce
 Agraz

Mustarde
 Mostaza

Flesshe
 Carne

Fatte
 Gordo

A puddynge
 Gurduta

Salte
 Sall

Butter
 Longaniza

Cheese
 Manteca, queso

Mylke
 Leche

Buttermylke
 Leche quasada

Creame
 Nata de leche

Potage
 Cosina

To eate
 Comer

To make good
chere
 Triumphamos

To drynke



 Beuer

A dronkerde
 Boracho

To sleepe
 Dormir

To aryse
 Leuentar

To go to bed
 Id a dormir

Brekefaste
 Cosacion

a Dyner
 Comer

a Reare dyner
 la merienda

To eate at after 
Noone 
Merendar

We wyll breake
our faste
 Queremos fazer 
colacion

God be thanked.
 Adios gratias.



¶ The .xiii. Cha|
piter of the De|
uell, of hel and of 
purgatorye.
¶ El .xiii. Ca. es los 
Diabolos / y dell in|
ferno / y dell purga|
torio.

¶ The Deuell
 ¶ Diabolo

Euyll spyrite
 El spirito maligno

Enemye euerla|
styng deth
 Ennemigo eterna 
Muerte

Hell
 Infierno

Purgatory
 Purgatorio

In the darke
 En obscuro

Lyghte
 la luz, lumbra



Payne
 Pena

Torment
 Tormento

Cursed
 Maldito

Dampned
 Dannado

Clensed
 Purgado

Chastened
 Castygado

To chasten.
 Castigar.



¶ The .xiiii. Cha of
golde, syluer, 
and of all other 
metales that maye
be caste.
¶ El .xiiii Ca. es del 
Oro / y plata / y de to 
das las cosas que se 
deshazen.

¶ Golde
 ¶ Oro

Gylted
 Dorado

Syluer
 Plata

Syluer vessell
 Plateria

Copper
 Cobre

Tynne
 Estanno

Scomme of siluer
 Peltrez

Latton
 Laton

Yron
 Fero

Stele
 Acciell

a Kettell
 Calderon

a Nayle
 Clauos



A Nedle
 Aguias

a Thymble.
 Dedall.



¶ The .xv. Chapi­
ter is of spyces.
¶ El .xv. Capi. es de 
le espezia.

¶ Peper
 ¶ Pimenta

Gynger
 Gyngybre

Nutmegges
 Nues muscada


Clowes
 Clauos

Longe pepper
 Pimenta luenga

Cynamom
 Canela

Incense
 Encienso

Myrre
 Myrra

Suger
 Acucar

Safron
 Acasran

Aloepaticum
 Aloepatico

Sope
 Xabon

Cotton sylke
 Algodon

Almondes
 Almendra

Ryce
 Arros

Rosyne
 Dua passa

Fygges
 Figo

Oyle
 Aseyte

Comyne
 Comino

Anys



Chesnottes
 Castanna

An aple
 Mancana

A peare
 Pera

A nutte
 Nuez

A haselnot.
 Auellanas

Sylke.
 Seda.



¶ The .xvi. Chap. of
warres, batayl­
les and players.
¶ El .xvi. Cap. de la 
guera / y de los Iu|
gadores.

¶ Warre
 ¶ Guera

To iust
 Iustar

A pauileon
 Peuellon

An oost
 Exercicio

Companies
 Esquadras

A banner
 Bandera

To make peace
 Fazer paz

Treason
 Traycion

A thefe
 Ladron

A rybalde
 Dellaco

Knauery
 Vellaqueria

A knaue
 Dellaco

To bewytche
 Encanter

The stewes
 Putaria



An whore
 Puta

To robbe
 Robar

To playe
 Iugar

I haue lost .x. gyl­
dens in playenge
 Perdi .x. floryns iu|
gando

That is thy losse
 Es tu dagno

It had ben better 
for thee, yf thou had|
deste Clothed thy 
selfe with that 
money
 Meior fuera que te 
vestiaras cam aquel|
los dineros

Thou saiest truth
 Tu dizes la verdad

But so is it not 
doone.
 Pero no es fecho.




¶ Finis.

¶ Imprinted by me Robert wyer: 
Dwellynge in S. 
Martyns paryshe, at the 
sygne of saynt Iohan
Euangelyst
besyde Charynge
Crosse.





