



An Alphabetical Table.


 

ABandon, put away.

Abase, bring low.

Abet, to maintain.

Abel, the second son of
Adam.

Able, sufficient.

absolute, without excep­
tion.

Abreviate, to shorten.

abortive, a child born be­
fore its time.

abrupt, disorder, out of frame.

abrupt, disorderly.

Absolve, to quit, free, for­
give.

absurd, against reason.

acute, quick, witty.

accurate, exact, curious.

Atchieve, to get the up­
perhand.

Atchieved, obtain'd the
conquest.

obsolete, of use.

acceptance, entertainment

accidence, introduction to
Grammar.

accident, change.

incident, subject to casu­
alty.

account, esteem.

Achor, a valley.

Acorn, that grows on
Oaks,

Acre of land, 160 Pole.

Adage, a proverb, an old
saying.

Adopt, to make one his
heir.

addicted, devoted.

adult, grown to full years.

alias, otherwise.

All, all things.

Awl the shoe-makers awl.

Ale, to drink.

ail, some trouble.

alley a narrow passage.

ally, associate.

aloud, when one speaks
so.

Allowed, approved.

Altar, on which they sa­
crifice.

alter, to change,

annual, yearly.

Annal, Chronocle.

arrows, to shoot with.

arrowse, to stir up.

arrass, rich cloth.

harrass, to toil.



Astronomy, art of Cæle­
stial bodies.

ascent, going upwards.

Ass, a dull beast.

ash, a tree.

ask, to enquire.

Asp, a serpent.

Hasp, to fasten the door.

Ax, to cut with.

acts, great deeds.

Ant, a pismire.

Aunt, mothers sister.

arrant, very,

errand, business one goes
on.

attach, to take hold of a body.

Athiesme, denying the
Godhead.

attaint, to corrupt.

Attaque, to face about in
a sea-fight.

austere, a fierce grim man

Oyster, a fish.

attentive, to give diligent
heed.

audacity, boldness.

augre, a Piercer.

augment, encrease.

authentick, undoubted au­
thority.

awry, to go awry.


B.

Bable, a toy.

Babel, confusion.

Babble, to prate.

Batchelor, one unmarried.

Bachelour of Arts. 

bacon, swines flesh dryed.

barrester, a Lawyer that
pleads at the bar.

Beocon on a hill.

beckon, to nod at.

beatifie, adorn.

badge, a mark.

batch, so many loaves as
is baked at once.

Bailiff, or Sergeant.

bail; to put in security.

bald, that hath lost his hair

ball; to play with.

bawl, to cry.

Baal, an Idol.

baulm, an herb.

band; for the neck.

bond, for money.

Barbara, a womans name

Barbary, a part of Africa.

Barbarism, cruelty.

bark of a tree.

Barque, a little ship.

Berk-shire.  

base, dishonourable.

Bas-Viol. 

Bear, a beast.

beer, to drink.

bier, to carry corps.

bellows, to blow with.

bellies, paunches.

beray,  defile.



bewray, discover.

beseech, to entreat.

besiege, to beset souldiers.

bin, to keep bread in.

been, were; or wast.

biggin, to wear.

begin, to enter on busi­
ness.

bittour, a wild-fowl.

bitter, not sweet.

Bigamy, Marriage of two
wives at once.

baudy, obscene, filthy.

body, a substance.

bodies of a gown.

boll, to wash in.

bowl, to drink in, or to
play with.

To blanch, to pull of the
rind.

To bleach, or whiten
clothes.

boar, a swine.

bore, to pierce a hole.

bough of a tree.

bow, to bend.

bowe to shoot.

boy, a lad.

Brachygraphy, short-
writing.

bread; to eat

bred reard up, or brought
up.

brain; or skull.

bran of wheat.

breaches, divisions.

breeches; men wear.

bruite, a rumour.

brute, rude.

bury, to lay in the earth.

berry of rabbets.

buy to purchase.

by me, or by and by.

Burglary, breaking into a
house.

Bumbast, cotten; wool.


C.

CAble, a rope.

Cabal, private con­
sultation.

call, to name.

caul, sewet that covers the
bowels.

capable, fit to receive.

Carol, a Song.

Coral; for children.

carriage, behaviour.

Carryer, one that carries.

carriere, a horse-race, full-
speed.

carrets to eat.

Chariots to ride in.

casuals that happens by
chance.

causey, a made-way.

A channel; or gutter.

A kennel for dogs.

cease; to leave of.

Celestial; heavenly.



seise, to lay hold on.

size, bigness.

cellar; to lay drink in.

sellar, one that selleth.

cement, to fasten together.

censure, a judgment.

censor, a reformer.

centorie, a plant.

centurie, a hundred years

sentry, a souldier on watch

chafe, to fret.

chaff of wheat.

chattel, all goods; leases.

cattel, beasts.

chear, to make merry.

cheer, good food.

A chare woman. 

chair; to sit in.

child-blain, sores from
chilness.

Cittern, or cithern, an in­
strument of musick.

circumspect, wary.

Citron; to eat.

circumference, a round
compass about a centre

circumlocution, one word
expressed by many.

clause, a piece of a sen­
tence.

clarifie, to make clear.

Claws, nails.

To cloathe with cloth.

Coat, a garment.

cote, a plate of inclosed
ground.

coife, for womens head-
attire

could, be able.

cogitation, thought.

coold; or made cold.

collar; for a doublet.

choler, a humor.

Collier, that carrieth coals

Scholar, one that learneth.

colour in the cloth.

colures in the Globe.

Comet, a blazing-star.

common, free for any.

complex, join'd together.

commune, to converse.

comfort, matter of joy.

confects made with Sugar.

consumption, a wasting
disease.

condole, to mourn over.

coop for hens.

cope, to change.

cops of wood.

concise; brief.

concomitant, that accom­
panies.

Colonel over a regiment.

compendious, short.

Colony, a Plantation.

colander; or strainer.

Coroner, or Crowner.

corroborate, to strengthen



A connexion, a tying to­
gether.

consanguinity, kindred by
blood.

consolidate, to make firm.

conserve, to keep.

conspicuous; clear; notable

A constellation, a compa­
ny of stars.

consumate, to finish.

counsel, advice.

council, to take counsel in

course, rough, gross.

cormorant, glutton.

corse, a dead body.

Costarmonger, an apple
seller.

costive, bound in body.

Cousin, a near relation.

cousen, to cheat.

countermand, to bid con­
trary.

current, a stream.

currant, passable.

corants, plums.

cravet to be worn about
the neck.

crevet,  a Goldsmiths mel­
ting-pot.


D.

DAm, a stopping of the
water.

Damn, to condemn.

Damsel, a brave lass.

damsin, a black plum.

Dandruff, or scurf in the
head.

A darling, one that's dear.

dandeprat, dwarf.

dear, beloved.

it cost dear.

deer, an hart, buck.

defer, to delay.

differ, to vary.

demur, debate, doubt.

deambulation, walking
abroad.

demure, modest.

Desart, wildernese.

desert, to forsake.

descent, genealogie.

decent, comly, hansom.

dissent, to disagree.

devices, tricks.

Devizes, a Towns name.

diary, a daily calender.

dairy, where cheese is
made.

Dilate, enlarge.

discomfit, to make com­
fortless.

Dine, to eat a dinner.

Digest, to set in order.

dissolute, debaucht, loose.

dissolate, uncomfortable.

doer, a maker.

door of a house.



Domestick, houshold.

dough, unbaked bread.

done, finished.

dun, a dark colour.

Doest thou blow the dust. 

doller, a Dutch-coine.

dolour, grief.

drain, to draw ponds dry.

drawn, pull'd.

draught of drink.

drought, driness.

driblets, small sums.

dray, a Brewers sled.

draw, to pull.

dew, small drops.

due, or owing.

dunce, an unapt boy.


E.

EAr, to make a cieling

seer; a prophet

Scir; a country

senior; the elder

junior, the younger

Seignior; the chief man in
Turky

seasin; as to make livery,
to give the right to a­
nother

seisin possession

season; opportunity

Sex; as male or female

sects; factions

Surgeon, or Chirurgeon.

Sergeant at Mace, that Ar­
  



Shear, that we cut.

sheer quite off.

shire, a County.

share, part with another.

shave, as Barbers do.

sheaves of corn.

sheathe, to put into the
sheath.

sheep, that bears wool.

Ship, that goes to Sea.

sinister, unjust, not equal.

shekel of the sanctuary,
two shillings.

sickle, to reap with.

shoot, a young sprig.

shoot, bulletes, arrows.

shout, make a noise.

shut the door.

Shute, a mans name.

Souldier that fights.

shoulder of the body.

shrew, a field mouse.

shrew, a curst woman.

shuttle, to weave with.

subtile, cunning.

sight of the eyes.

cite, to quote an author.

sign, a mark.

sing with the voice.

singe, in the flame.

sink, a gutter.

cinque-port-town. 

sigh, a mourning.

sith, seeing that.

sithe; that we mow with.

seethe; to boyl.

slead; to drag things on.

sledge; a huge hammer.

slow; not quick.

slough; a dirty pool.

so; as in that manner.

to sow corn; seed.

sew; with needle and
thread.

I saw; or have seen.

to saw timber.

Soal; of the foot.

sole; onely; a fish.

soul; or body.

soar; to fly higher.

sore; painful, tender.

sowre, contrary to sweet.

some, few; certain ; some
body .

sum; a sum of money.

sun; the sun that shines.

son; a fathers son.

spear; a sharp pointed
weapon.

sphear; the circle wherein
the stars move.

stairs; steps to go up.

stares; birds.

stare, to look stedfastly on.

Stars, in the firmament.

staple of the door.

staple; a firm commodity.

stable; for horses.



stopple of a bottle.

stature; proportion; big­
ness.

Statute; Law made.

Statue; an Effigies.

stead; room; lieu; in stead
of.

Steed; a stately horse.

bed-stead; that we lye
upon.

steel; to edge tools with­
all.

stile; a faculty in writing.

Steer, a Bullock

steer; to guide a Ship.

stood; did stand.

stud; a small post.

straight; even; quickly.

streight; distress, strait.

succour; aid; relief.

sucker; a sprig.

Suit in Law

suit of clothes

Sewet; fat of Beef,
or mutton

swound; to faint.

sound; intire.


T.

TAber; timbrel, a little
drum.

taper; a stately wax can­
dle.

Intail; an inheritance in
fee

Tail; of a beast.

tale, an idle story.

tall, high in stature.

Teal; a fowl.

Tares, weeds in the corn.

tears, that we do weep.

Taint, to infect.

Taunt, to flout; jeer.

attaint; to convict by Law

Thames, a river.

Team, of Horses.

teem, to be with child.

teat, which a child sucks.

Tit, a little horse.

Tenor; in musick.

Tenor, the purport of a
thing.

Tenure the manner of
holding tenements

thorow; as to pierce tho­
row

through; by means of

throw; to cast off

Thrush a singing bird

truss; to tye up

thyme; a herb

time; continuation of hours

Title of honour; or right to
a thing.

tittle; a point; a speck

toe, the toe of the foot

too, too much or too little

towe; Ockam; combing
of flax



two, two things

to; to a place

tow; to hale a boat

tomb; a monument, sepul­
chre

tome; a section part of a
folio

tongue; that we speak with

tongs; to take up coals
with

torn; that torners do make

turn; to move to and fro

torne; or rent

track; footsteps

tract; or treatise

treaty; parley concerning
peace

treatment; entertainment

tripartite, of three parts

trey, a vessel

tray, number of three


V.

vacant, empty

vacation, a respite time

vocation, calling or im­
ployment

vain, empty , foolish

vein in the body

vail, covering of the face


vale, to put off, submit

vale, or valley

vale, farewell

Venice, a great City

Venus, the goddess of  love 


vial, phial, a wide mouth­
ed pot, or cup

Viol, an instrument of mu­
sick

vice, wickedness

voice, to sing with

visage feature in the face

vizzard to hide the face
with

vital spirits wherein life is
seated

victuals, food, provision

Voucher, advocate.


U.

Umbles, of a Deer

humble; low, submissive

Umpire; that decides a
controversie

use, custom

usury, money upon inter­
est

us; we

Uz, Jobs Countrey

utensils, things necessary
for our use

vulgar, common


W.

Wain, declining of the
Moon

wan, pale, of a sickly look

wand, a riding rod

waist, ones middle



waste, desolate, useless

waits, the City musicians

wast, or wert

waites, he waiteth 

weights, as Troy weight
12 ounces to a pound,
or Avoir de pois weight
16 ounces to a pound

wight, an Island

wales a Countrey

walls of a City

wale, great thread in stuff

bewail, to bemoan

Wakes, country feasts

a wake, to rowse up

walk, to go by leisure

walks, where people do
walk

wardship, the guardian­
ship of Orphan

worship, an Esquires dig­
nity

warp, to chap as boards
do

warp, yarn; woven

woof yarn, that goeth
athwart the cloth

hoof of a Horse

way, that we walk in

weigh, to try in a balance

wey, a wey of Cheese

whey, and butter milk

wear, to put on

were, they were

ware, a commodity

wier, Iron thread

weel, to catch fish

wee'l, for we will

weal, wealth; a pimple

weild, to turn a sword a­
bout

wild, untame

wicked, ill given, debaucht

wicket; an half door

win, to get a wager

wind, that blows

wine, squeezed out of
grapes

witch, that bewitcheth

which, that, who

woad, dying stuff

wood, fewel; timber

wo, alass misery

woe, to be a suitor

wrap, to fold in

rap, to give a small blow

rape; to force

wring, to squeeze hard

ring, on the finger

wrote; I have written

wrought, I did work

by rote, without book

wrong, to do wrong


X.

Xpian, Christian,

X ten




Y.

YEa, yes

yet, nevertheless

to wit, viz. or videlicet,
that is to say

yest, barm, to mix with
meal for bread

it's, for it is

tis, for it is

you, thou, ye

an ewe, or sheep

yrksom, tedious

yellow of colour

year, 12 months, or 365
dayes, and 6 hours

ynkhorn, to put ynk in, to
write withal

yeeld, to render up, to sub­
mit

yew, tree

yolk, of eggs

yoak, that oxen draw in

Oak, a tree

yore, in old time

ewer, a small necked pot

your, as your book


Z.

ZEdary, wormfeed

zeal, great love, ar­
dent affection

The Zodiack, that of the
firmament, underwhich
the planets move

Zion, or Mount Zion,
the Church of God,
whom he hath chosen
to dwell in for ever.





These proper names, with what they signifie,
Are here added, for you to learn thereby.



ABel, mourning

Abiah, the will of
God

Abraham, father of a great
multitude

Adam, man, earthly

Abigail, the fathers joy

Andrew, strong, or manly

Barnabas, the son of con­
solation

Baruch, blessed

Benjamin, the son of the
right hand

Bethel, the house of God

Caleb, as a Hart

Daniel, judgement of God

David, beloved

Eleazar 
Eliezer the help of God

Elijah, God the Lord, or
a strong Lord

Elisha, my God saveth or
the health of God

Emanuel, God with us

Ephraim, fruitful

Eunice, good victory

Ezekiel, the strength of
God

Enoch, taught or dedicate

Ezra, an helper

Gabriel, a man of God

Habakuk, a wrestler

Hilkiah, the Lords gentle­
ness

Jacob, a supplanter

James, a maintainer

Ichabod, the glory is de­
parted

Jedidah, beloved

Jehosaphat, the Lord is
the judge

Jesus a Saviour

Job, sorrowful

Joseph, encrease

Israel, a prince with God

Isaac, laughing

Lazarus, the help of God

Levi, joyned

Lot, wrapped, joyned

Melchizedek, king of
righteousness

Mehetabel, how good is
God, or God doing well

Michael, who is God, or
who is like God !

Moses, drawn up, or taken
out

Nehemiah, comfort, or the
Rest of the Lord

Noah a ceasing or rest

Paul, marvellous

Peniel, seeing God



Peter, a stone, or rock

Phebe, clear, or bright

Phinehas; a bold counte­
nance

Philip, a warriour

Rachel, a sheep

Rebecca,  sed , or blunt, con­
tention , or contention
hindred

Sabbath, Rest

Samuel, heard of God

Sarah, a Lady, or dame

Shem, renowned

Simon, hearing, or obeying

Theophilus, a friend of God

Thomas, deepness, without
bottom

Timothy, the honour of
God

Titus, honourable

Uzziel, the strength of
God

Zabdiel, the dowry of
God

Zachariah, mindful of the
Lord

Zephaniah, the hiding of
the Lord



FINIS


